---
layout: page
title: About
permalink: /about/
---

## Digital Scholarship at UTM Library

The [Digital Scholarship Unit](https://utm.library.utoronto.ca/digital-scholarship/about) at the [University of Toronto Mississauga (UTM) Library](https://library.utm.utoronto.ca/) was established in 2019. The mandate of the Library's Digital Scholarship Unit is to develop and maintain digital projects for the Library by creating and using digital methods, theories, and tools to support curricula and research at the University of Toronto Mississauga.

To that end, this Jekyll website hosted on GitHub pages provides documentation on how to use a static website in digital research. The website is based on the workshop 'Build a Website with Jekyll and GitHub Pages' at UTM Library. This website is maintained by [Chris Young](http://sites.utm.utoronto.ca/chrisyoung/), Coordinator of Digital Scholarship and Librarian.

## Static Websites for Digital Research

A static website is a collection of webpages that is delivered to a user's web browser exactly as it is stored. In contract, dynamic websites are collections of webpages generated by a web application. The main differene between static and dymanic websites are that dynamic websites allow interaction and input from the user whereas static websites need to be updated by the content creator or admin of the website. Another way to define static and dymanic websites are that static websites provide the same content for all users whereas dynamic websites will change depending on algorithms generated by a web application to draw on specific user metadata. Classic examples of dynamic websites are online marketplaces, social media platforms, and search engines. Every time you log in to a social media account the content you view will change depending on a variety of metadata associated with your profile. This is also the case when you search for restaurants in search engines which geolocate depending on IP address. 

Static websites, on the other hand, do not use a database to store information; instead, all information to be displayed on each webpage is already contained in an HTML file for that webpage. The HTML pages that make up a static site can be completely written by hand, or you can offload some of this work using something like Jekyll.

Jekyll is software that helps you “generate” or create a static website (you may see Jekyll described as a “static site generator”). Jekyll takes page templates—those things like main menus and footers that you’d like shared across all the web pages on your site, where manually writing the HTML to include them on every webpage would be time-consuming. These templates are combined with other files with specific information (e.g., a file for each blog post on the site) to generate full HTML pages for website visitors to see. Jekyll doesn’t need to do anything like querying a database and creating a new HTML page (or filling in a partial one) when you visit a webpage; it’s already got the HTML pages fully formed, and it just updates them when/if they ever change.

Note that when someone refers to a “Jekyll website”, they really mean a static (plain HTML) website that has been created using Jekyll. Jekyll is software that creates websites. Jekyll isn’t actually “running” the live website; rather, Jekyll is a “static site generator”: it helps you create the static site files, which you then host just as you would any other HTML website.

Because static sites are really just text files (no database to complicate matters), you can easily version a static site—that is, use a tool to keep track of the different versions of the site over time by tracking how the text files that compose the site have been altered. Versioning is especially helpful when you need to merge two files (e.g., your updating your public research data, and you want to combine the multiple versions), or when you want compare files to look for differences among them (e.g., “How did the original About page describe this project?”). Versioning is great when working with a team (e.g., helps you combine and track different people’s work), but it’s also useful when writing or running a website on your own.
